Collectors documentation (#210)
yiisoft/yii-debug: README.md

The preferred way to install this extension is through [composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/).

```
composer require yiisoft/yii-debug --dev
```

> > The debug extension also can be installed without the `--dev` flag if you want to collect data in production.
> > Just specify needed collectors to reduce functions overriding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The debug extension also can be installed without the `--dev` flag if you want to collect data in production.
> Specify needed collectors only to reduce functions overriding and improve performance.
```

Usage
-----

> Once the extension is installed, simply modify your application `params` as follows:
> 
> `config/common/params.php`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the extension is installed, modify your `config/common/params.php` as follows:

```

```php
return [
    'yiisoft/yii-debug' => [
        'enabled' => true,
    ],
    ...
];
```

> All included collectors start listen and collect payloads from each HTTP request or console running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All included collectors start listen and collect payloads from each HTTP request or console run.
```

Install both [`yiisoft/yii-debug-api`](https://github.com/yiisoft/yii-debug-api) and [`yiisoft/yii-dev-panel`](https://github.com/yiisoft/yii-dev-panel)
to be able to interact with collected data through UI.

## Collectors

Yii Debug uses a concept named "collectors". 

> Each collector decides what payload it needs to collect and exports the collected payload in order to save it into storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each collector decides what payload it needs to collect and exports the collected data in order to save it into storage.
```

Reviewer: It was replaced because it was repetitive.

> A collector may work both with HTTP request and console running, or individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collector may work either both with HTTP requests and console runs, or individually.
```

> A collector may be as just a event listener as a decorator to any service from application dependency injection container configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collector may be event listener or a decorator to any service defined in the application dependency injection container configuration.
```

Take a look at the [`Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector\CollectorInterface`](./src/Collector/CollectorInterface.php):

```php
namespace Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector;

interface CollectorInterface
{
    /**
     * @return string Collector's name.
     */
    public function getName(): string;

    /**
     * Called once at application startup.
     * Any initialization could be done here.
     */
    public function startup(): void;

    /**
     * Called once at application shutdown.
     * Cleanup could be done here.
     */
    public function shutdown(): void;

    /**
     * @return array Data collected.
     */
    public function getCollected(): array;
}
```

> We suggest to use the trait to reduce the duplication of code and any possible bugs: [`\Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector\CollectorTrait`](./src/Collector/CollectorTrait.php)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the trait to reduce the duplication of code and any possible bugs: [`\Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector\CollectorTrait`](./src/Collector/CollectorTrait.php)
```

All you need to create a collector is to implement the interface and register it in the configuration.

### Example

```php
class MyCollector implements \Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector\CollectorInterface
{
    use \Yiisoft\Yii\Debug\Collector\CollectorTrait;
    
    /**
     * Payload collected during a run. 
     */
    private array $data = [];

    public function getCollected() : array
    {
        return $this->data;
    }
}
```

> Good way to implement collecting payload is also implement a resetting the data. With `CollectorTrait` it is simple and you just need to add `reset` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you implement collecting payload, it is also a good idea to implement data reset. With `CollectorTrait` it is as simple as adding `reset` method:
```

```php
    private function reset(): void
    {
        $this->data = [];
    }
```

You can enable collector in application configuration as follows:

```php
return [
    'yiisoft/yii-debug' => [

>         // if you want to register collector both for web session and console run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // if you want to register collector both for web requests and console runs
```

        'collectors' => [
            \App\Debug\AwesomeCollector::class,
        ],

>         // if you want to register collector only for web session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // if you want to register collector only for web requests
```

        'collectors.web' => [
            \App\Debug\AwesomeWebCollector::class,
        ],

>         // if you want to register collector only for console run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // if you want to register collector only for console runs
```

        'collectors.console' => [
            \App\Debug\AwesomeConsoleCollector::class,
        ],
    ],
];
```

Under `yiisoft/yii-debug` configuration you may use:
1. `collectors` key for both web and console runs

> 2. `collectors.web` key only for web session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `collectors.web` key only for web requests
```

> 3. `collectors.console` key only for console run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `collectors.console` key only for console runs
```

> Do not register a collector for a session where the collector will not collect any payload.

The lines above connect collectors with a debug extension run. 

> Under the hood it just calls `getCollected()` method from the collectors at the end of application cycle run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood it calls `getCollected()` method from the collectors at the end of application cycle run.
```

### Event listener collector

Subscribe to any events you want with adding a listener into the configuration:

With [`yiisoft/event-dispatcher`](https://github.com/yiisoft/event-dispatcher) configuration it may look like the following:

```php
return [
    \Yiisoft\Yii\Http\Event\BeforeRequest::class => [
        [\App\Debug\AwesomeCollector::class, 'collect'],
    ],
];
```

Each `Yiisoft\Yii\Http\Event\BeforeRequest` triggered event will call `App\Debug\AwesomeCollector::collect($event)` method, 
so you can collect any data from the event or call any other services to enrich the event data with additional payload.

### Proxy collector

> Proxy collectors are used in case you want to decorate a service from DIC and sniff methods' calls with its values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proxy collectors are used in case you want to decorate a service from DI container and sniff methods' calls with its values.
```

First you need to create a class that will work as a decorator. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern if you are new with it.

> Decorators may inject any services through `__construct` method, but you should specify services you like to wrap.
> Into section `trackedServices` of `yiisoft/yii-debug` configuration you should specify:
> 1. A service you want to decorate
> 2. A decorator that will decorate the service
> 3. A collector that will be injected into the decorator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decorators may inject any services through `__construct` method, but you should specify services you like to wrap.
In the section `trackedServices` of `yiisoft/yii-debug` configuration you should specify:

1. A service you want to decorate
2. A decorator that will decorate the service
3. A collector that will be injected into the decorator
```

Syntax of configuration is: `Decorating service => [Decorator, Collector]`. 

Despite adding the tracking service configuration you still need to register the collector if you did not do it before.
Whole configuration of added proxy collector looks like the following:

```php
return [
    'yiisoft/yii-debug' => [
        'collectors' => [
            \App\Debug\AwesomeCollector::class,
        ],
        'trackedServices' => [
            // Decorating service => [Decorator, Collector],
            \Psr\Log\LoggerInterface::class => [\App\Debug\LoggerInterfaceProxy::class, \App\Debug\AwesomeCollector::class],
        ],
    ],
];
```

#### Index collector

> Index collector is a collector that provides additional "summary" payload. 

Reviewer: Is it a good idea to rename it from "index" collector to "summary" collector?

Author: Sounds good

Author: https://github.com/yiisoft/yii-debug/pull/210/commits/3efc7bbf5a5ab0915d63f8ed0f0f61cf8c23ece5
